---
layout: post
---

# A disciple of Christ

A frequent complaint I hear about software is something like this: "This
software is so painful to use!"

Or I'll hear: "this software is intimidating." I hear this a lot with AI tools.
When I can talk through their concerns, there is mistrust and outright
hostility, surprisingly not coming from a dislike of an Artificial Intelligence
*per se*. The problem is it's intimidating.

In Exodus 20:1-5, I see a clear, loving distinction between precious human
souls and material things. God says, "Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven
image," which doesn't mean I can't make any material things! Keep in mind I
think Software is one of those material things.

I'm striving to live as a disciple of Christ. I also create software. Am I
in trouble with Christ for the software I created?

Read on!

## Are material things evil?

Take it as an axiom that human life is more important than software.

My software is made by me. I'm very human. It's the old paradox of free will:
there's a paradox where software is material while also seeming almost
... human. I believe Christians have a lively hope and shine like a city set
on a hill because of Jesus (Matthew 5:14-16). Whatsoever things are of good
report, and if there be any virtue, I think of these things and it elevates my
soul (Philippians 4:8).

Getting into the paradoxical, magical world of software can challenge anyone.

Here is some hard-won experience I've learned: good and bad examples of how
to create software that blesses the world. [I don't think any software is
perfect!](/2024/05/17/Jesus-approach-to-software.html)

1. Strive for integrity: some software clearly states its purpose and the
   limits of what it can do. [SQLite](https://sqlite.org) uses intensive
   testing to maintain high integrity. Contrast that with pornographic
   software, or AI that deceptively hides a large number of "Mechanical Turk"
   workers paid to fill it with information. I have more praise for SQLite
   below.

2. Embrace imperfection: I feel elevated as a software creator even when the
   code barely works.

3. Accomodate a wide variety of needs. Here are 5 categories; there are more.
   I apologize for not covering the complete range of humanizing accessibility
   affordances; I am continuously learning more about it.

**Categories:**

1. Accomodate multiple languages: I love how AI tools have opened up a
   pentacostal flowing of many languages (Acts 2:4).

2. Accomodate simplicity: when someone wants to quickly accomplish some
   task, software can strive to make it simple and lovely. Contrast this
   with setup screens or software updates that force someone to make
   choices when they are probably distracted, don't fully understand, and
   will probably regret the whole ordeal later. Even worse, the choice gets
   hidden and can't be easily undone!

3. Accomodate complexity: some people use the same software every day, and
   over time they gain mastery of it. If software forces someone to do
   something they don't want to do, or an update removes a choice in a false
   belief that there is "only one way to do things," it causes people pain.

4. Accomodate everyone: the blind, deaf and impaired. I won't list examples
   because they are so numerous. Jesus took the time to seek out these
   kind of people.

5. Accomodate rejection: let people undo their actions. Let people express
   their pain and frustration. I saw this come up recently when an AI feature
   was added, with no way to turn it off or avoid it (see: Accomodate
   simplicity)

It's an incomplete list that captures an ideal: I strive to add love to
the world (the New Commandment in John 13:34).

Software can convey my love in a concrete form. It's a way to extract
some of my inner life, crystalize it in digital form, and share it with
others.

### What does it mean to be a disciple?

Jesus said "By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have
love one to another." (John 13:34) This is called the **New Commandment**
and it takes my focus right back to humanity.

There's a bigger list in the [SQLite Code of
Ethics](https://sqlite.org/codeofethics.html):

> 1. First of all, love the Lord God with your whole heart, your whole soul, and your whole strength.
> 2. Then, love your neighbor as yourself.
> 3. Do not murder.
> 4. Do not commit adultery.
> 5. Do not steal.
> 6. Do not covet.
> 7. Do not bear false witness.
> 8. Honor all people.
> 9. Do not do to another what you would not have done to yourself.
> 10. Deny oneself in order to follow Christ.
>
> (Excerpted from
> [SQLite Code of Ethics](https://sqlite.org/codeofethics.html))

While this won't appeal to everybody, it's a great source of satisfaction
for me.

## What does it profit me?

The intent of living a Christian disciple's life is to get to do things
like this:

> Why is programming fun?
>
> ... Finally, there is the delight of working in such a tractable medium.
> The programmer, like the poet, works only slightly removed from pure
> thought-stuff. He builds his castles in the air, from air, creating by
> exertion of the imagination. Few media of creation are so flexible, so easy
> to polish and rework, so readily capable of realizing grand conceptual
> structures. (As we shall see later, this very tractability has its own
> problems.)
>
> Yet the program construct, unlike the poet’s words, is real in the sense
> that it moves and works, producing visible outputs separate from the
> construct itself. It prints results, draws pictures, produces sounds, moves
> arms. The magic of myth and legend has come true in our time. One types the
> correct incantation on a keyboard and a display screen comes to life, showing
> things that never were nor could be.
>
> &ndash;&ndash; [Fred P. Brooks, The Mythical Man-Month
> ](https://www.goodreads.com/quotes/10984693-why-is-programming-fun-what-delights-may-its-practitioner-expect)

I think religion and software use the same idealistic, creative parts of
me. I enjoy applying religious ideals to my software work. And I learn
things when working on software that enhance my worship.
